# FOCS Homework 10, for Day 11

You may edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory.

If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Gabriel Butterick
Check one:
[ ] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[x] I completed this assignment with assistance from Hannah Twigg-Smith, who worked as a great sounding board
   and/or using these external resources: ___
```

## I. Logic

### 1.

The following tables are [truth tables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth_table).

_true_ and _false_ are represented by `T` and `F`. _OR(false, true)_ is commonly written in [infix notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Infix_notation): `F OR T`.

The second table shows the value of the function _a OR b_, for all possible values _a_ and _b_. For example, _false OR true_ (the second row) has the value _true_ (the final cell of that row).

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ AND _b_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | F
 T  |  F  | F
 T  |  T  | T

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ OR _b_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | T
 T  |  F  | T
 T  |  T  | T

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ XOR _b_
----|-----|---
 F  |  F  | F
 F  |  T  | T
 T  |  F  | T
 T  |  T  | F

a. Construct the truth table for _a XOR (b XOR a)_.

_a_ | _b_ | _a_ XOR _b_| _b_XOR_a_|_a_XOR_b_(b_XOR_a)_
----|-----|---		   |---       |---
 F  |  F  | F          | F        | F
 F  |  T  | T          | T        | F
 T  |  F  | T          | T        | F
 T  |  T  | F          | F        | T


b. Which function corresponds to the English word "or", as used in "You will eat your meat OR you can't have any pudding" (where _a_ = "You will eat your meat" and _b_ = "you can't have any pudding").

If we define the 'a' part as being a boolean describing true if the meat has been eaten or false if the meat has not, and b as being a similar boolean but with pudding instead, we can proceed.
It seems like this 'or' is representative of a AND. If meat is eaten and pudding is eaten, the statement is true. if meat is eaten and not pudding, it violates the defined rules. If pudding is eaten and not meat, that also defies the rules. If neither is eaten, nothing occurs.

## II. Questions 2–6 are the same as in-class activities 2-6

### 2.

Consider the following context-free grammar G:

```
E -> E + E | T         # <- added "| T"
T -> T x T | (E) | a
```

Convert G to a PDA.


### 3.

Convert grammar G from (2) to Chomsky Normal Form.

E0-->E1 D_E1 | T
E1-->E1 D_E1 | T
T-->P_E B | T_M T | A
A-->a
P-->(
B-->)
M-->x
D-->+
D_E1-->D E1
P_E--> P E1
T_M-->T M


### 4.

Is the grammar G's language a regular language? If yes, produce a FSA or regular expression for this language. If not, show this. 

(a)+ (('+'a)*(xa)*)*((xa)*('+'a)*)* #impossible

It is not a regular language. We know this because you would need a counter to keep track of the parenthesis and be sure they all line up.
Let's say the language is regular, then it should have a number greater than 0, p, such that every string in the language L can be divided into xyz where |xy|<=p and |y| >= 1 and x(y^i)z is in L for every positive integer i. Because the grammar defining this language is self-referential, there is no definite p, because there is no finite number of states, due to recursion. Because a finite state machine is, by definition, finite, there is no finite state machine that could accept all, and only, possible strings in L. Therefore L cannot be regular because it has no pumping length.



### 5.

Theorem 1: The language {a^n b^n c^n} is not a context-free language.

a. Use Theorem 1, together with the languages {a^i b^i c^j} and {a^i b^j c^j}, to show that the set of context-free languages is not closed under intersection.

The only way the intersection of these two languages can satisfy both languages is to describe it as {a^n b^n c^n} which is not a context-free language. Therefor, these two languages are context free and their intersection does not form a context free language.


b. Use the pumping lemma for context-free languages [Sipser pp. 125] to prove Theorem 1.

Assume {a^n b^n c^n} is a context free language. Let s be a string that exists in the language L. Let s = (a^p)(b^p)(c^p) where p is the pumping length. we can divide s up into uvxyz with the conditions that:
for each i>= 0, u(v^i)x(y^i)z is in L
|vy| > 0
|vxy| <= p.
Because both v and y cannot be empty, they must contain at least one type of character. If they both contain only one type of character, there is no way for the first condition to be true if s=u(v^2)x(y^2)z, making a contradiction. 
If v and y contain multiple types of characters, the number of characters mandated by the first condition wont be violated, but the order of characters will be mixed up, making the string still in violation. The language can't be context free.


### 6.

Consider the context-free grammar G:

```
S -> NP VP
NP -> NP PP
NP -> DET ADJ N
VP -> V NP
VP -> VP PP
DET -> a | the
ADJ -> tall | purple | ^
N -> boy | girl | flower | binoculars
V -> touches | sees
PP -> P NP
P -> in | from | with
```

a. Show that the string "the girl touches the boy with the flower" has two
different leftmost derivations.

S -> NP VP-->DET N VP-->the N VP-->the girl VP--> the girl V NP--> the girl touches NP--> the girl touches NP PP--> the girl touches DET N PP-->
the girl touches the N PP--> the girl touches the boy PP--> the girl touches the boy P NP--> the girl touches the boy with NP--> the girl touches the boy with DET N--> the girl touches the boy with the N--> the girl touches the boy with the flower

S--> NP VP-->DET N VP-->the N VP-->the girl VP-->the girl VP PP-->the girl V NP PP--> the girl touches NP PP--> the girl touches DET N PP--> the girl touches the N PP--> the girl touches the boy PP--> the girl touches the boy P NP--> the girl touches the boy with NP--> the girl touches the boy with DET N--> the girl touches the boy with the N--> the girl touches the boy with the flower

b. Describe in English the two different meanings of this sentence.
It could mean that the girl is in physical contact with the boy and the flower is in the near vicinity, or it could mean the girl is physically touching the flower to the boy.

c. Use G to generate another ambiguous sentence.

The boy saw the girl with the flower



d. Modify G so that it generates strings with adjectives: `the girl saw the tall boy`, `the girl touches the boy with a purple flower`.

You don't need to know this, but here's how the variable names relate to linguistics.

Variable | meaning
---|---
S | sentence
DET | determiner (article)
N | noun
NP | noun phrase
P | preposition
PP | prepositional phrase
V | verb
VP | verb phrase

[Adapted from Sipser 2.8.]
